For the first time ever has Danish TV been granted
access to a NATO warship out on live operations.
For three months will the 150 men and women on board
Absalon fight pirates in the waters outside Somalia.
For the Danish soldiers it will be 3 months of
action, hardships and unique solidarity.
And we are along at the frontline
when Denmark goes pirate hunting.
Pirate Hunt
Are you a pirate?
Inhumane conditions to live in.
I've learned not to take anything for granted.
Pirate Hunt
It's under two weeks until the crew
on Absalon is going home to Denmark.
But before they can see their families
they have a huge task ahead of them.
The Warship has guests.
In the cells at the lower decks
sit 25 pirates that Absalon just -
- moments ago captured in their biggest
operation during their entire deployment.
The Somali pirates were heading out to capture
a merchant vessel when Absalon caught them.
Permission to fire granted.
During the operation Absalon freed
14 Pakistani and Irani hostages.
They have adjusted well
to their new temporary home.
The roles have turned and the pirates
themselves are now behind bars.
Even though Absalon has freed
hostages from a hijacked ship -
- the case is like any other criminal case.
The Somali's are only charged for
piracy until found guilty by a court.
DJ, the leader for the Military Police,
therefore has a gigantic task ahead of him.
He has to both gather
evidence for a trial -
- and question the Somali's
about their criminal activities.
Mike Papa here, come in.
MP, can you confirm that we have
25 suspected pirates onboard?
I can confirm,
just counted 25.
Thanks,
are there any minors?
Stand by, we'll check it now.
We'll check for minors.
It's important to find out how old
the suspected pirates are.
If they're under 15 special care
has to be shown during  detention.
14.
13.
They're lying.
They lie like fuck.
Absalons interpreter is masked
for security reasons.
If he's recognized the pirates could try and
take revenge on him or his family.
-He says he's 13.
-Like hell you're 13, you're older.
So 7-8 says they are under 15.
-As soon as they start talking...
-Yeah they lie like hell.
Otherwise we will need a doctor
to confirm their age.
Now they are going to sit there,
not allowed to talk -
- so they don't match up their story.
You could see I asked how old they were, if you
say it in the open they all say they are under 15.
They hope we'll put them ashore or something.
While DJ questions the Somali's, -
- his colleauges are on the Jelbut
looking for evidence of piracy.
Here!
The Frogmen have taken over the
boat and are sailing behind Absalon.
-So you've finally made captain.
-Pirate captain!
Some title.
The Somali pirates seemingly threw all
their weapons over before surrendering.
Among clothes and rests
of the narcotic Khat -
- the Frogmen searches for weapons and things
that could be used in a case against the pirates.
Charges for RPG-grenades.
In good condition.
All of this is Khat.
They chew on it.
We're very interrested in celll phones,
we can get a lot of information out of those.
Captain Carsten arrives at the Jelbut to see the
damage the many rounds have inflicted on the boat.
It could give him an idea about how to
place rounds in future operations.
A bit surreal, on the one side we've
been keeping an eye on it for days, -
- and in just 24 hours it changes dramatically.
Now we stand here, the hostages
are safe and the pirates onboard.
- Nice ship you got Christian.
- Yes, not too bad!
No doubt inhumane conditions to live in.
You just have to keep in mind 39 people lived here.
The majority being the 25 pirates while
the others were more or less slaves.
So no doubt a hard period for them.
I can understand their joy getting out.
As soon as the evidence against
the pirates are gathered -
- and witnesses give testimony, -
- the plan is to put the Iranian and Pakistani fishers
back on their boat and let them sail home.
While Absalon can sail
on to the Seychelles.
The pirates were nummerized when
they were put in the cells.
02, 03, 06 are going
to have pictures taken.
-2, 3, 6.
-Yes.
It's written on their bodies to both identify them
but to also to take away from their own identity -
- so Absalons Military Police
can keep them in a state of shock.
Any pirates who might be under 15 years old
have their wrists X-rayed.
The small bones inside changes by age.
And that way they can determine
the age of the suspected pirates.
Based on their bone structure in their hand
we'll see if they are as young as they say.
Many times it turns out
they are much older...
The doctor determines all the
Somali's are over 15 years.
And the questioning can begin.
They can't themselves decide how
long that will take.
Each suspected pirate is
registered and questioned.
Are you a pirate?
-No.
-No well.
DJ is tasked with gathering all the information
that could be used agains them in a trial.
My name is David.
You were captured by a Danish warship.
You're suspected for piracy.
What's your name?
It's routine that all suspected pirates
are photograhed and fingerprinted.
They also look for certain characteristics.
This could be relevant if Absalon arrests a pirate captured
by another NATO warship in an earlier operation.
What was your function? Job?
He was a worker.
Taking care of the fish.
Are you a pirate?
He says he is a farmer and
that he doesn't know about any piracy.
I think you're full of lies!
The hostages tell a completely different story.
If the pirates are to be sentenced, the most
important evidence will be the witness statements.
All the witnessess are therefore questioned
by Absalons military lawyer.
Pakistani Jamal Khan can also tell how terrifying
it was to be prisoner on their own boat.
Under the circumstances
we felt very helpless.
We thought we were
going to die there and then.
We worried about what our families
were thinking had happened to us.
We couldn't contact them.
Everyone was worried.
I expected it was hard.
That they were badly treated.
But I had not expected they
were putting up mock executions.
I had not expected shooting next to
their heads when they received water.
They they were given water mixed with fuel.
Being hit with rifle stocks etc.
Just one big terror regime.
Somali face.
While the hostages are relaxing
with training and games -
- the suspected pirates are
going on their first walk.
Stefan from the Military Police instructs the Boarding
team on how to get them safely into the missile silo.
No looking around in the hangar.
Up to the right and into the missile silo.
And line them up agains the wall.
Start with these five first.
Make sure they are always facing down.
Attention Absalon!
Due to a walk in the yard -
- all travel to the
missile well is forbidden.
Keep looking down.
The pirates are going with their heads down -
- because they must not be
allowed to orientate on the boat.
This is important in case they
suddenly try and escape.
The 25 pirates are brought into Absalons missile silo.
Here they can't see the ocean and orientate
how far the ship is from Somalia's coast.
The missile silo is in addition the
most secure outdoor deck on Absalon.
Which is important in case the pirates try
to run when their handcuffs come off.
It's to get some air and movement.
If they sit still too long down in the cells -
- their intestines stop functioning
and they suffer from constipation
It's also to give them a break from their
otherwise monotone presence in the cells.
The Military Police has discovered one
of the pirates is a repeat offender.
The same pirate was taken by
Absalon two months earlier.
Here Absalon discovered 7 Somali's in a small Skiff.
They threw a ladder in the water.
But the pirates had already
thrown their weapons over board -
- so Absalon detained them for five hours
before setting them free again.
It may sound like a paradox to catch the
same people for piracy again and again.
But that's the name of the game.
Ask a Somali, human life costs nothing.
I think an Ak-47 is worth more
than two human lives in Somalia.
And that's what you're up against.
That's where you really hurt the pirates.
Their logistics, money,
boat, fuel, weapons, -
- GPS, cell phones, everything
they use to commit piracy with.
The humans are completely worthless.
Even if we capture -
- 30 pirates and jail them,
60 new ones will just show up.
That's just how it is.
Captain Carsten also don't think this is the
last time Absalon will capture a pirate twice.
I think the desire to make the millions
make them try again and again.
Which stresses the importance of our presence here,
even if it is just symptom treatment.
If we relax our presence we will
just give the pirates free reign again.
But with the prospects of dollars they can earn
they will be out here as fast as they can again.
Pirate Hunt
It's now a couple of days since Absalon
detained 25 suspected pirates.
And even though the warship is in the other end -
- it's still in the mission area
to carry out tasks for NATO.
Brumbass is therefore sent out every day to
gather information about pirate activity.
-How far to target?
-Five minutes maximum.
The helicopter flies out to take pictures of
pirate camp Grisby and the hijacked ships.
One of the hijacked ships is Albedo.
Let's make sure we
don't get too close.
The pirates here have been agressive
and threatened the crew on Brumbass.
-He's standing with a weapon.
-Yeah.
-Take us away KUB.
-Yeah away KUB.
With this experience in mind Kir
reacts instinctivly -
- when he suddenly sees smoke from
a weapon pointed against Brumbass.
At the moment I observe these smoke clouds -
- the pulse of course rises,
you talk extra fast and 'hard'.
It all happens fast and you make
fast descisions to get out of there.
You don't got time for much thinking
besides we're out of here.
Brumbass is now safely back on Absalon,
no one was injured.
It's important that the leadership
knows exactly what happened -
- so they can make the right
safety precaution measures.
So we've got report that you observed something
that may have been a weapon being fired.
I saw at least two clouds of smoke.
I think what happened was this
person somehow fired a weapon.
I don't know what it was but I'm
fairly sure it was a weapon -
- because of those smoke clouds,
almost no doubt.
The Somali's live five man per
7 square meters in the cells.
After several days on Absalon the tight quarters
are starting to effect the suspected pirates.
They're sitting with the cuffs on today because
there was a fight in the cells this morning.
So until we know where we have them
they'll remain secured.
Absalons Second in Command is on the other hand
making sure the hostages get to stretch their legs.
Move over so we can let the Captain sit in the chair.
Marie can you get the Skiff camera up here?
The hostages are brought to the top deck -
- where just a few days ago several
salvos were fired at their boat.
In the missile silo the tour is soon over.
And this suits boarding member Stine just fine.
I don't like to look at them.
Because I think they are...
A bunch of ruffians who don't
deserve nice treatment like this.
Considering what they have done.
DJ also doesn't have much sympathy for the pirates
but he can understand their situation.
We should keep in mind those we meet
in the boats are the little men, -
- the big guys behind all this sit
on land and earn all the money.
Those we encounter in the boats are just the henchmen,
who do this for not much more than just earning a living.
I don't have sympathy or compassion for them, -
- but I can understand their
reasoning for comitting piracy.
While the Military Police have
control over the pirates -
- Second in Command is going to have to work
a bit harder to communicate with the hostages.
We talk a...
simple language with our friends.
They ask where the Somali's are,
if they are imprisoned.
We've talked a bit about missiles which is ...
Swoosh.
And get out for some fresh air
and see their own boat, -
- a Iranian ship as they say.
Now we're going to see the engine room,
they ask about it all the time.
Since Brumbass may have been fired upon -
- the helicopter crew is interviewed
individually by intelligence officer Jens.
What happened when you came up to the ship.
His task is to establish the timeline and
evaluate the threat from the anchored ship.
Kir is the most important one since
it was he that spottet the smoke.
He stood up and. bent over
as we've seen many times before.
Takes the RPG up.
Could clearly see it was an RPG.
Walks towards the bridge wing
and aims on us.
And I spot minimum two puffs
of smoke from where he stood.
-From where?
-The bridge.
I've talked with most involved
and gathered the pieces, -
- and I've made an analysis.
Kir is sure of what he saw.
But the analysis officers have
also examined the video.
If we slow down the tape and notice this man
standing with the unknown object.
He bows down and
stands up again, -
- this time with a piece of cloth
he hangs up to dry.
If a weapon was fired there.
If we assume an RPG he would
not be able to do that.
He would be out of it because
of the back blast and pressure.
If it was an AK or PKM the other guy
would probably had looked at the guy firing.
He does not, he ignores it totally.
I therefore conclude it was
likely just some steam -
- from some water he flushed over or
putting out something he was burning.
I conclude it highly unlikely to be able
to spot a weapon fired from 1km distance.
Thanks Jens,
any further notes?
Even though the attack turned out
to be steam from laundry water, -
- Kir is in no doubt it was the right descision
to get out from there in a hurry.
If they fire they fire.
You have to expect the worst -
- even though you find out otherwise afterwards.
The pictures aren't more worth than us.
-Damn right they aren't.
-Right.
We have a family we need
to come home to.
It's dinner time for Absalon and
the suspected pirates.
You can see they don't
have much space.
Some of the pirates are tired of the conditions
and the Miltary Police's rough control.
So they are being a little disobedient
and refusing to eat.
We control everything about them here,
what they eat, when they go to the toilet, -
- and intake of food is the only thing they can control.
So they start a hunger strike.
But we're not going to do anything.
If they become very ill they will be
brought to the hospital and given water -
- and brought down again.
We're not going to force food into them.
Absalons crew have been dealing with the pirates and
hostages for the last few days and are becoming tired.
The last thing they need before they can put the
Iranian and Pakistani fishers back on their boat -
- is to transport the pirates
attack vessels over to Absalon.
The two Skiffs are important evidence.
But the operation is made difficult
because of rough waves.
Help me hook this.
We need to get it as safely
into the water as possible.
It could land upside down and
then we'd have a problem.
It's Kim that's going to make sure
the Skiff lands properly on the water -
- so that the crew in the RIB can catch
the rope and tow the Skiff to Absalon.
The two Skiffs could sink if they land upside down
when the Frogmen throw them over board.
We are getting ready to
throw the skiff over -
- with ropes attached so
Absalon can tow them.
Big brother to Little sister,
Stand-by on the Jelbut.
This is Big brother,
that is correct.
Stern first and then
we just push.
Ready?
Wait for the wave.
First one, it's turning upside down!
Can we save the rope before...?
Can you get the rope?
Fasten it!
-Got it?
-Yes.
Silence on channel 24 now.
Big brother to Little sister.
We got the Skiff tied to our boat
but it's sunk.
Copy that.
It's not possible to save it.
-Copy that.
-I think it is sinking.
Ok let it go.
Let go Ana.
Meanwhile the hostages have reached
Absalons giant engine room.
Back on the Jelbut the Frogmen are ready to
throw over the pirates second attack boat.
It's important that this one doesn't sink as well.
This is Absalon. Can you lower the Skiff -
- so it doesn't sink straight away.
Yeah we're tying a rope to it.
Watch out you don't get squeezed.
Good enough?
Duty chief here,
it's floating at least.
You have to let it go!
Otherwise we can't grab it.
I simply don't understand
what's going on over there.
Unfortunately the first Skiff sunk.
But as you can see we got the second one
so they are going to bring it to Absalon.
And hoist it inside, then we are
going to bring the Skiff engines.
Load them over in the RIB.
So some work left.
The pirates attack boat is now going
to be hoisted up inside Absalon.
A task not without danger.
Feel free to lower the hook a bit
before we come closer to you.
Bit more down!
Let go! More down!
Up! Up!
Bit up! There!
You got it!
Now they just need to bring the
engines over to Absalon -
- and the last piece of evidence is secured.
But that doesn't happen without problems as well.
Ready? Ok we're coming in!
Down down. Ok I had not accounted for that sorry.
It's not fucking ok that we're stuck to this engine now!
Fucking seamanship of the lowest order.
We're sailing with water out of the boat.
Take it easy now.
The engine is now on Absalon.
It will be used as evidence.
So the operation went ok,
we lost one Skiff but it happens.
But I've also learned not to
take anything for granted.
Pirate Hunt
The 14 hostages Absalon freed
have now been on the ship 5 days.
It's not long before Absalon is in a position where
they can sail home on their own with their boat Tahiri.
The captain prepares an official
farewell with the hostages.
Carsten wants to make sure the
rest of the way home to Iran -
- is as safe as possible after
the last few months dread.
We are changing the name of
the boat from Tahiri to Denmark.
For the freed Pakistanis and Iranians it will
be good to come back to their own ship again.
In 7 days they will be reunited with their families.
We have told the captain where we are
and he is happy to return to his ship now.
From here they can reach the
island Socotra by Africa's Horn.
It's familiar waters not far away
where they can easily sail home.
Martin gives the hostages a phone so they can
phone Absalon every day and say they are ok.
Because there could be pirates
in the waters on their way home.
After two months imprisonment and fear
the 14 fishers can finally return home.
I like the fact that we secure
the waters before we say goodbye, -
- so they don't risk meeting pirates
after a couple days at sea.
But we can't do much more from Socotra,
they will just have to stay away from pirate waters.
None of the 25 pirates have gone into a real
hunger strike, but their faiths remain uncertain.
They are innocent until found guilty by a court,
but it's not certain they will ever face a judge.
It's up to Denmark to make a deal with either the
Seychelles or Kenya to take them and prosecute them.
In my mind there's no doubt that that Dhow was
hijacked by some of the pirates we have in our cells.
There's also no doubt they left with the
intent to hijack a merchant vessel.
And that they have threatened the hostages with
weapons on their life, and treated them miserably -
- and brutaly, almost torture like.
And we have very strong testimony on this.
But that's my assesment as a layman,
I can of course hope for a prosecution.
But how will the country where the
trial takes place see the evidence?
I hope it's strong enough, but I have also
learned never to take anything for granted.
Because it's not black and white.
Now it's time to come home and in less than 24 hours
the crew will be reunited with their families again.
Three months pirate hunt is almost
over for the crew on Absalon.
It's been a mission with its ups and downs.
We have focused on detering pirate attacks,
prevent pirate attacks and disarm pirates.
And in the situations we have had
I think we have succeeded.
Of course you will find small things where this could
have been done better or this could have been adjusted.
But I think the crew has delivered
and I'm proud on their behalf.
In the long run Carsten would have liked for the Danish
Frogmen to carry out raids on the pirate camps on land.
Here they could have obstructed the pirates by
destroying their attack boats and fuel depots.
It's not talk about invading Somalia, -
- but it is based on the intelligence we have
gathered and where we have isolated pirate camps.
I think we with great certainty could have gone in
and really limited the pirates ability to go to sea.
Carsten now hands over his ship to the next crew
under leadership of Commander Captain Anders Friis.
It will be their task to watch over the 25 pirates
until their faiths have been decided.
Even though Stine is happy to have come home
everything isn't rose red.
Always sweet to come home.
One thing is to interrupt your daily life -
- and go out,
?? -
- you also leave your friends,
your family and your boyfriend.
They keep with their daily routine while you
suddenly appear saying "Tjohei I'm here again!"
The Military Police leader has had some
mighty busy days with the pirates.
In Copenhagen airport waits his family.
His daughter is especially excited to have him home.
I think she looks forward to it.
I think she's missed her father,
or that's what she has expressed at least.
As heartfelt it is to say farewell to your family
as overwhelming is it to see them again.
Being able to give them a big hug and
feeling their presence is just great.
Want some chewing gum?
Looking very forward to it.
I'll get my luggage and go out.
Get home, take off my uniform and
be done for this time. It's great.
Should be here.
You're just as suntaned as before, dad!
Yes, just as suntaned as before...
I've missed you so much.
Three months as chief for all
of Absalons crew is over.
Now the family waits just outside the door.
Even though the farewell is hard,
I never get used to it, -
- it's also incredibly important because you leave
with your crew on a task and a journey, -
- so you have a lot of things to think on while at the
same time saying goodbye which is hard enough on its own.
But the homecoming is different,
coming home seeing your airport, -
- and see all those happy
faces makes it all worth it.
It's absolutely a highlight.
We're going home Dennis.
There's no pirates around the corners here,
just good and warm people -
- so I will just spend the time getting used to
not being in character and making descisions.
I'll leave it to these three.
As of the end of this documentary four pirates
were in jail in the Seychelles awaiting prosecution, -
- with another four jailed in Kenya, -
- but Denmark was not able to find a country for the
remaining 17 pirates who were set free on Somalia's coast.
The 14 hostages safely reached home with
their newly named boat 'Denmark'.